JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
changes at the top of Donald
Trump's campaign.
We talk with the new manager,
ask why and
what will be different.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead:
From raging
fires on California's charred
lands to deadly
flooding in Louisiana, we take a
look at the
country's battle with extreme
weather.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And powerful
national security
hacking tools leaked online put
computer networks
at risk.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus, an
inside look at
the world's most active volcano
-- how one
geologist is using the constant
flow of data
to learn more about the Hawaiian
landmark.
MIKE GARCIA, Geologist,
University of Hawaii:
Well, with most volcanoes, you
want to know
when it's going to erupt.
And so that's a primary concern.
But, in this case, where we have
an eruption
that's been going on for over 30
years, the
big question is, when is it
going to stop?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
presidential
nominee is bringing new leaders
to his campaign
team, and not for the first
time.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: There was a new
seating chart at
Donald Trump's campaign
headquarters in Trump
Tower today.
The Republican nominee was still
in the center
chair, but around him, signs of
a leadership
shuffle, the second in less than
two months,
as polls show him losing ground.
The new campaign CEO?
Stephen Bannon.
Bannon, top executive of the
combative conservative
Web site Breitbart News, is new
to political
companies.
Trump also promoted senior
adviser Kellyanne
Conway to campaign manager.
Conway, a longtime pollster,
will focus on
messaging, as she did this
morning on FOX
News.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
It's the busy homestretch to
Election Day,
and we just need to sort of beef
up the senior-level
roles in a way that we are
dividing and conquering.
JOHN YANG: Paul Manafort, top
aide for the
past two months, will keep his
title of campaign
chairman, though his role is
unclear.
News of the shakeup came after a
Trump rally
in Wisconsin last night, where,
for the second
day in a row, he used a
teleprompter as he
tried to broaden the field.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I'm asking for the vote of every
African-American
citizen struggling in our
country today who
wants a different and much
better future.
JOHN YANG: He spoke not far from
Milwaukee,
still reeling from unrest
touched off by a
weekend police shooting that
left a 23-year-old
black man dead.
DONALD TRUMP: The violence,
riots and destruction
that have taken place in
Milwaukee is an assault
on the right of all citizens to
live in security
and to live in peace.
JOHN YANG: Today, Trump was to
receive his
first intelligence briefing as
the Republican
nominee.
That's despite telling FOX News
on Tuesday
what he thought about the work
of U.S. intelligence
agencies.
"Look what's happened over the
last 10 years,"
he said.
"It's been catastrophic."
Democratic nominee Hillary
Clinton is to briefed
as well.
Today, her campaign wouldn't
answer questions
about it.
Clinton was campaigning in
Cleveland, Ohio,
today, trying to fortify her
slim polling
lead in a critical swing state.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I think it's fair to say that
Donald Trump
has shown us who he is.
He can hire and fire anybody he
wants from
his campaign.
They can make him read new words
from a teleprompter.
(LAUGHTER)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: But he
is still the
same man who insults Gold Star
families, demeans
women.
There is no new Donald Trump.
This is it.
JOHN YANG: Trump is to take a
new step in
his campaign later this week,
airing his very
first general election ads in
swing states.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will talk with
Trump's new
campaign manager, Kellyanne
Conway, right
after the news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Turkey announced plans to
release some 38,000
prison inmates to make room for
people rounded
up after last month's failed
coup attempt.
Prisoners with two years or less
left on their
sentence will qualify for early
release, but
the most violent criminals will
not be eligible.
Turkish authorities have
detained roughly
40,000 people linked to the coup
plot.
About half of them face formal
charges.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the White
House pledged $17 million to
help fight opioid
and heroin abuse.
It will help law enforcement
agencies halt
drug trafficking and prevent
overdoses.
But the Obama administration
urged Congress
to do more.
The president signed a bill
aimed at addressing
the opioid crisis last month.
But it fell far short of the
more than $1
billion that his administration
requested
to fight the epidemic.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The nation's
commuter and
freight trains have shown little
progress
in installing safety
technologies mandated
by Congress.
That's according to a new report
out today
from the Federal Railroad
Administration.
The safety system uses GPS and
radio frequencies
to automatically stop or slow
trains, preventing
collisions and derailments.
It was supposed to be installed
by 2015.
But Congress had to extend that
deadline until
at least 2018 after projects
were delayed
by a lack of funding and
technical obstacles.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Technology firm
Cisco announced
that it will lay off up to 5,500
employees,
roughly 7 percent of its work
force.
The world's largest manufacturer
of computer
networking equipment has seen a
slowing demand
for its products.
But it's tried to shift its
focus into software
and cloud-based networking in
the face of
growing competition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On Wall
Street, stocks managed
modest gains after minutes from
the Federal
Reserve's last policy meeting
signaled it
could raise interest rates soon.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
22 points to close above 18573.
The Nasdaq rose a point, and the
S&P 500 added
four points.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And controversy
continues to
brew behind the scenes at the
Olympic Games.
Brazilian police arrested
Europe's top Olympic
official, Patrick Hickey of
Ireland, at his
Rio hotel room, and charged him
with ticket
scalping.
Meanwhile, a Brazilian judge
ordered American
swimmers Ryan Lochte and Jimmy
Feigen to stay
in Rio, claiming they gave
conflicting accounts
of being robbed at gunpoint last
week.
Lochte has already returned to
the U.S., but
Feigen is still in Brazil.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
Donald Trump's new campaign
manager on the
latest shakeup; Louisiana
flooding and California
wildfires, the increasing
frequency of natural
disasters; an English community
that could
lose its E.U. subsidies after
voting for Brexit;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
the changes
at the top of the Trump campaign
and what
led to all this, with Robert
Costa, national
political reporter for The
Washington Post.
Robert, welcome back to the
program.
So, it was just two months ago
we saw a change
at the top of the Trump
campaign.
So, what happened?
ROBERT COSTA, The Washington
Post: That change
two months ago saw Paul
Manafort, the campaign
chairman, take control of the
Trump campaign
from Corey Lewandowski, the
longtime campaign
manager.
And it was a change of
philosophy back then
from let Trump be Trump to a
more disciplined
strategy, more party unity, more
focus on
a scripted message.
Trump has scrapped that Manafort
playbook,
however, over the weekend,
deciding to go
with this new team, Steve Bannon
from Breitbart,
Kellyanne Conway, the longtime
pollster who
he is friendly with.
And it's because Trump,
according to my sources,
is looking at these last 80
days, and he says
to himself, he wants to do it
his way, run
from the gut, run on his
instincts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, tell us
about Stephen
Bannon.
Who is he?
He is not somebody we have known
associated
with the campaign, although we
know he's been
close to Mr. Trump.
ROBERT COSTA: He's a colorful
and populist
figure on the American right,
someone who's
not closely associated with the
Republican
Party, hasn't run a presidential
campaign
before, has rarely, if ever,
been involved
with political campaigns.
But he has been running this Web
site Breitbart
News, which is popular for its
nationalist
themes, its advocacy against
illegal immigration.
He has become close to figures
like Sarah
Palin over the past decade.
And this profile on a certain
segment of the
American right has brought him
close to Trump.
His politics overlap with
Trump's own.
And he has been someone who has
provided Trump
with informal candid advice over
the past
year.
And Trump has developed this
rapport and has
turned to Bannon at many turns
as he's thought
about his campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Robert, what
do your sources
tell you we should expect to see
change in
Trump's behavior on the campaign
trail and
the campaign itself?
ROBERT COSTA: Bannon's strategy,
according
to people close to both Trump
and Bannon,
is to run a less partisan
campaign than Paul
Manafort may have advised for
Trump in recent
days.
And what I mean by that is a
populist campaign
that doesn't stress political
issues in the
traditional way you see in a
general election
campaign of right vs. left.
What we should expect to see
from Trump, according
to the people who were in
meetings with him
today, is a full-throated
nationalist message,
something that is based on
rallies, media
appearances, and trying to rouse
those voters,
working-class voters in swing
states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what is meant
by nationalist
message?
ROBERT COSTA: It is something
that is based
in Trump's pitch about
immigration and trade
and the economic frustration
that Trump believes
is out there in much of the
American -- much
of the country.
And it is a sense that jobs
should stay here,
products should be made here,
foreign policy
should be crafted from an almost
isolationist
perspective, America first, as
Trump often
says.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Robert, the
people you
talk to inside the campaign, do
they still
believe they can win this?
I mean, we know the polls have
been difficult
in the last month for Mr. Trump.
ROBERT COSTA: They believe there
is a difficult
path ahead, but they look at two
things.
They think suburban voters in
places like
North Carolina, Ohio and
Pennsylvania remain
intrigued by Trump, interested
in perhaps
switching over to Trump in the
final stretch,
even if they are skittish at
Trump at the
moment and moving toward Clinton
in the polls.
If Trump can change his message
to really
zero in on those voters by
focusing on national
security, populism and
nationalism, the Trump
campaign thinks they have a
shot.
The other thing they are going
to try to win
over is more women voters.
And that is where Kellyanne
Conway comes in.
She spent her whole career
trying to help
Republicans appeal more to the
female voter.
And that's going to be part of
the equation
moving ahead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally,
Robert, do they
lead you to believe this is the
last change
we will see in the campaign?
ROBERT COSTA: You never know
with Donald Trump.
He kept this decision close to
his vest over
the weekend, didn't tell many
party leaders,
if any, that he was going to
make this overhaul
in his campaign.
He is someone who runs a small
operation compared
to most presidential campaigns.
And he is someone who is a lone
loner in American
politics, almost an isolated
figure, who believes
his own calls on political
issues, on strategy
matter more than any kind of
consultant's
advice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Costa with
The Washington
Post, we thank you.
ROBERT COSTA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now let's get
an inside
view of today's changes in the
Trump campaign
from the woman we have just been
hearing about.
She's the new campaign manager,
Kellyanne
Conway.
Kellyanne, hello.
It's good to see you.
We just heard Robert Costa say
this has to
do in part with Donald Trump,
frankly, wanting
less discipline, wanting to be
himself on
the campaign trail.
Is that what is going on?
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
Well, first of all, Judy, thank
you for having
me.
And I appreciate your
congratulations.
So, everybody is always talking
about the
Donald Trump pivot.
Pivot is style when they give
him advice.
It's, don't say this, don't say
that, you
should do this, you shouldn't do
that.
And I think when he says, you
know, he gets
tired of being told by different
people inside
and outside of what to do and
how to speak,
it doesn't free him to talk
about the issues,
which is where he really wants
to take this
campaign.
I think the discipline you have
seen this
week is in giving those
speeches, on Monday
about radical Islamic terrorism,
where, whether
people liked the speech and the
solutions
or not, at least they can look
at them.
They can look at the road map.
They can look at the
several-point plan and
decide whether or not that is
the commander
in chief they would like to
trust.
Yesterday, he followed it up
with a very unusual,
very robust policy speech,
really taking the
case to Hillary Clinton and
putting her on
the hot seat to explain why,
after decades
of public service herself, while
she has been
a politician for decades, and
why in all of
our big cities, we have
Democratic mayors,
and we have a rise in poverty
and crime and
homelessness, a rise in
unemployment.
So, I think he's taking the case
right back
to Hillary Clinton, which is
really his best
shot at winning the presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what we just
heard from
Robert Costa -- and it's been
reported -- the
other new person -- or the new
person elevated,
I should say, in the campaign is
Stephen Bannon,
who does come from Breitbart
News.
And why would Donald Trump turn
to him?
He is someone who has never run
a campaign
before.
He has been associated with this
pretty controversial
news Web site.
What does Mr. Bannon bring?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Donald Trump
said it best,
Judy, where he said: I know them
well, and
I want people who want to win
and who believe
I can win and who are warriors.
And I think Bannon is a guy
ready for the
right kind of battle, realizing
that this
is a pretty simple choice.
You either want Donald Trump's
view of free
market health care, where it is
portable and
is affordable and is accessible
to more people,
or you want more of Aetna
pulling out of 11
to 15 states just yesterday,
announcing $430
million worth of losses over the
last two
years.
That followed UnitedHealthcare
saying it would
suffer a billion dollars in
losses by being
on the exchange.
These are serious issues that
impact people.
And to Bob Costa and to your
point, Judy,
women are the chief health care
officers of
their households.
These health care exchange
realities on Obamacare
are very real to them, as the
chief health
care officers.
And we would like to know if
Mrs. Clinton
owns Obamacare, in other words,
if she feels
like it is a good policy moving
forward.
Would she move us towards a
single-payer system,
a la Bernie Sanders?
Are there pieces of Obamacare,
the Affordable
Care Act, that she would scrap
or the ones
that she thinks are worth
keeping?
We need those questions
answered.
When you pivot, the pivot really
needs to
be on substance, when you start
talking about
issues, and not just
individuals, when you
start talking about principles,
and not just
personalities.
Then we're having a conversation
befitting
of the voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's try
to understand
what this is, because, again, we
just heard
Robert Costa describe an
approach that is
going to try to be not so
partisan, not so
-- quote, unquote -- "Republican
vs. Democratic."
But we know that the Breitbart
News Web site
is what they call -- it's been
called alt-right,
a movement of hard-right
ideologues and white
nationalists who scorn
traditional conservatism.
Is that the philosophy Mr. Trump
is embracing?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: No, it's not.
And that's, I guess, someone's
opinion or
characterization of a Web site
or stories
on a Web site.
But, at the same time, I would
like to point
out, because I think too much of
the reporting
has said that this is a reset,
this is a shakeup.
The fact is, just over there in
Trump Tower
today, the core four, Manafort
and Gates,
who have been for on for a
while, Bannon and
myself, we met on any number of
issues.
We reviewed the last cuts of our
ads that
are going up this weekend.
We sat in, all four of us sat in
on the roundtable
with national security and
terrorism and foreign
policy experts.
I believe you showed some
footage from there.
So, we are all working together.
This is an expansion of a team
in these critical
last couple of weeks.
And I think what is very
important is that
the candidate trusts the people
around them.
And you see who is there.
Despite what Hillary Clinton
said today -- that
was a complete lie.
Nobody got fired at the Trump
campaign today.
Nobody is feeding him -- I found
that to be
really unbecoming, to talk about
Donald Trump
reading new words off a
teleprompter.
I mean, this has to go both
ways, where she
is pretty insulting of him.
And I appreciate that it's
actually getting
covered here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you a little
bit more, Kellyanne Conway,
though, about
where you do stand in the polls.
You are a pollster.
You have made it your career.
How do you read the polls?
I mean, Donald Trump right now
is running
behind in virtually every single
battleground
state.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, he is,
but with varying
margins.
And, Judy, we're happy that it
is August and
not October or November.
We recognize that there is work
to do.
And some of that work is among
independent
voters.
Some is among Republicans.
And some is among the work to be
done among
Democrats who, in the same
polls, say that
they just don't trust or much
like Hillary
Clinton.
So, we feel like they are open
to our message.
And we are going to work hard
for all those
votes.
That is what campaigns are for.
Campaigns are really for
combining the message,
the messenger, the delivery, the
opportunities,
the ground game, the data
operation, all of
which is really coming into
place.
And I have to credit Manafort
and Gates for
putting so much of that together
before we
arrived.
Secondly, if you look at the
horse race numbers
in these statewide polls, Judy,
they look
really great for Hillary
Clinton.
But if you go just a little bit
underneath,
you see that many of her
fundamental measurements
are still very poor.
You have -- in the Virginia
poll, for example,
you have 54 percent of
Virginians saying they
are unfavorable towards Hillary
Clinton.
There is not a lot that she can
do to change
that image, because they already
know her;
68 percent said that the
selection of Tim
Kaine doesn't matter to their
vote; 66 percent
of the white voters there say
that they are
unfavorable towards her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly, let
me...
KELLYANNE CONWAY: So, she really
needs to
work on those as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I just want to
squeeze in one
last question.
And that is the description of
the philosophy
of this campaign as nationalist,
almost isolationist,
is that something you accept?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: No.
I -- in fact, I emphatically
reject it.
And, as I said, Judy, just hours
ago, I sat
in a roundtable with former and
current congressmen,
with generals, with elected
officials at very
high levels, with national
security and foreign
policy experts.
And that wasn't the talk around
the -- that
wasn't the conversation around
the table,
I assure you.
We allowed the press in.
And so, no, I reject it.
But I'm not surprised critics
and naysayers
have to do that.
Look, the only thing I would ask
of the Clinton
campaign and many of their
sympathizers is,
when you are asked a question
about Hillary
Clinton, try not to say Donald
Trump every
other word.
That is where criticisms like
that come from.
I think people -- if you have a
real debate
on the issues, you go back and
look at the
radical Islamic speech from
Monday, you go
back and look at the law and
order speech
and the minority community
speech yesterday,
you find that that
characterization is patently
false.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I think I
was hearing
Robert Costa quote people he was
talking to
from inside the campaign, but we
can straighten
that out later.
Kellyanne Conway, again, the
newly named campaign
manager for Donald Trump, thank
you very much.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Thank you,
Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Two major
disasters in two
different parts of the country
have sent tens
of thousands of people fleeing
from their
homes, and caused millions of
dollars in damage.
Are these just freak events, or
are they in
some way related to climate
change?
William Brangham brings us the
latest.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's called
the Blue Cut
Fire, and it's wreaking havoc in
Southern
California.
The massive blaze closed major
roadways like
part of Interstate-15 that
connects Los Angeles
and Las Vegas.
And last night, officials issued
evacuation
orders for more than 34,000
homes.
That's some 82,000 people.
WOMAN: I think this is the worst
that I have
ever seen, you know?
And it's kind of getting used to
the idea
of being homeless.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The fire
erupted yesterday
in the Cajon Pass, a critical
corridor just
north of San Bernardino, only 60
miles from
Los Angeles.
It quickly expanded to more than
45 square
miles.
Ten air tankers, 15 helicopters
and some 1,300
firefighters were deployed
within 24 hours.
They faced hot and windy
conditions.
MICHAEL WAKOSKI, San Bernardino
County Fire
Battalion Chief: The fuels are
extremely dry
and very explosive this time of
year.
And in my 40 years of fighting
fire, I have
never seen fire behavior so
extreme as it
was yesterday.
MARK HARTWIG, San Bernardino
County Fire Chief:
I was able to get up this
morning and get
some eyes on it from the air.
In a word, it was devastating, a
lot of homes
lost yesterday.
There'll be a lot of families
that come home
to nothing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Governor Jerry
Brown declared
a state of emergency for the
Blue Cut area,
as he did earlier this week for
a major blaze
north of San Francisco.
That fire has since started to
fade.
The man suspected of sparking
it, as well
as 16 smaller fires over the
last year, has
now been charged with arson.
Seventeen hundred miles across
the country,
a different kind of disaster is
unfolding
in Louisiana, where some of the
worst floods
in history have hit the state.
As the water begins to recede in
some parts,
the numbers are stark.
At least 11 people have died,
30,000 people
have been rescued, and 40,000
homes damaged.
MAN: We lost everything, God,
just about.
We got out safely and all of our
friends are
safe, so that's the main thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So far, about
68,000 people
have signed up for assistance
from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
The American Red Cross says this
flooding
has triggered its largest
disaster operation
since Superstorm Sandy in 2012.
The catastrophes in California
and Louisiana
have again raised the question:
Are these
events caused in part by global
climate change?
Both events follow a July that
was the planet's
single hottest month since
records began in
the 19th century, and many
computer models
have indicated that, as
temperatures rise,
droughts and extreme weather are
likely to
follow.
To help us sort out what's
driving these extreme
events, we turn to two
scientists well-versed
in these matters.
Barry Keim is a climatologist
for the state
of Louisiana and a professor at
Louisiana
State University, and Adam Sobel
is a professor
of environmental science at
Columbia University.
He also directs its Initiative
on Extreme
Weather and Climate.
Thank you both for being here.
Barry, I would like to start
with you.
Before we get into the science
of all of this,
can you just tell us, how are
things in Baton
Rouge right now?
BARRY KEIM, Louisiana State
University: Well,
in Baton Rouge, they are
improving, but across
the broader area, there still
are some issues.
Things are slowly starting to
settle down
or simmer down a little bit.
But, right now, across most of
my immediate
region, people have already
started ripping
out carpets and gutting houses.
So, we're already starting the
cleanup.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, this was
obviously a
historic amount of rainfall that
fell on your
state and that flooded you all
out.
Can you give us a sense of the
context of
how serious these storms were,
and should
we be thinking about these in
terms of climate
change?
BARRY KEIM: This event was -- it
was a tropical
disturbance.
It was a very weak -- in fact,
it -- I would
classify it practically as an
easterly wave.
And the amount of rainfall
amounts, as I suggested,
were staggering.
Just to put this in perspective,
a 100-year
rain event in this region is
roughly 14 inches.
A 1,000-year event is about 21
inches.
Well, we have about eight sites,
seven or
eight sites across Southeast
Louisiana or
South Central Louisiana that
exceeded the
1,000-year mark.
And, in fact, we have one site
that had 30
-- over 31 inches of rain.
Now, 1,000-year event is 21
inches, and this
was 31 inches.
So, that ought to give you some
context on
just how severe this rainstorm
was across
this area.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In that
context, do you
think of this as something that
is -- what
we would expect to see with
climate change,
or is that not part of your
thinking?
BARRY KEIM: Well, no single
event really tells
you anything about climate
change specifically,
and even one year's worth of
events.
And, admittedly, this past year
has been very
strange.
We had the floods in South
Carolina.
Texas had some serious floods.
We even had a major flood
earlier this year
in Louisiana.
In fact, we even had an early
one back in
this past October which was
quite extraordinary.
So, it does seem like there is
something unusual
going on.
But I still wouldn't quite
characterize this
as being a sign that the climate
has officially
changed.
We are just in a very unusual
period right
now.
And this could be indicative of
climate change,
but it's way, way too early.
And we need a lot more data and
understanding
of the science to be able to say
something
conclusively like that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Adam Sobel, I
would put
the same question to you.
In California, we have seen this
historic
drought.
It has dried out the landscape.
It is partly why we have seen
these explosive
fires across the state there.
But, again droughts are not
unusual for California,
the same way floods are not
unusual for Louisiana.
How do you see these in relation
to climate
change?
ADAM SOBEL, Columbia University:
Well, I think
you have to talk about each
event separately.
So let's start with the
Louisiana event.
I think the California situation
is a little
bit different and has been going
on for a
number of years.
So, there have actually been a
few studies
specifically on that event.
But since we're talking about
Louisiana and
the floods now, just for some
general context,
I mean, across the United
States, as well
as most places in the world
where there is
adequate data to ask the
question, we have
seen increases over the last
decades, or in
some cases the last century, in
the extremity
of severe rain events.
So, we see heavy rain events
becoming heavier
and a larger fraction of the
rain falling
at heavy events.
And this is what our climate
projections tell
us should happen as the climate
warms, although
to uncertain degrees, but it's
qualitatively
consistent.
And we expect it on physical
grounds, as a
warming climate means that there
is more water
vapor in the atmosphere.
Now, it's true that each
individual event
is a result of many factors, and
climate change
is at most one of them, and
usually a small
one.
So a lot of things have to
happen for an extreme
event to occur.
Otherwise, it wouldn't be an
extreme event.
And so climate change can at
most push the
odds a little bit in one
direction.
So, I mean, we now have a new
emerging area
of science called extreme event
attribution,
where people actually do studies
and have
ways of making probabilistic
statements.
You can't ever say this event
was caused by
climate change or this single
event is conclusive
evidence of climate change.
But you can say that climate
change appears
to have made it such a percent
more probable,
or given that it occurred, make
it such and
such percent more extreme.
Those studies haven't yet been
done on the
Louisiana event.
My guess is that they will be
done pretty
soon.
They can get done pretty quickly
now.
And I would cautiously predict
that they are
going to show some increase in
the likelihood
of this happening due to climate
change, although
I wouldn't want to put a number
on it.
So, that is the sort of broad
context.
I think it is the kind of thing
we expect
to see more as the future
proceeds.
And it's the kind of thing we
have been seeing.
But I agree that to make
stronger statements
than that about a specific
event, it is certainly
possible to overstate the
connection.
But there is a lot of science
behind the statement
that there may be some
connection there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Barry, back to
you.
I'm just curious, do you think
that this is
what we have just got to become
accustomed
to, that what was once
considered an extreme
event is now just the new
normal?
And, if so, what does that mean
for policy-makers?
BARRY KEIM: Yes, well, we're
certainly in
a period right now where we have
seen quite
a bit -- quite a few extremes.
And -- but we have had some
periods in the
past where we have had
clustering of really
big, catastrophic rainfall
events in the past
as well.
But I tell you, the last decade
or so really
does raise some eyebrows, and
very, very suspicious.
And as what this means for
policy implications,
I mean, this is just so complex,
so politically
loaded, that, I mean, it's
really tough to
navigate through these waters,
so to speak.
And so, yes, it is really hard
to say a whole
lot conclusively on what kind of
policy should
proceed as a result of these
recent extremes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Adam, with
relation to the
fire in California and the many
people appointed
to the very long drought that
has dried out
much of California and makes
these fires more
common and more violent when
they actually
occur, how do you see climate
change in relation
to that particular event?
ADAM SOBEL: Right.
So, if we look at the drought in
California,
there have actually been several
studies of
it, some of it done by my
colleagues here
at Columbia.
And those studies actually show
the complexity
of studying events like this,
because the
answer actually depends how you
ask the question.
If you ask about just the lack
of rainfall
-- of course, the cause of a
drought is just
lack of rainfall -- then the
studies have
tended to come to a conclusion
that it's not
-- this event is not
fundamentally caused
by climate change.
That said, once you have a lack
of rainfall,
the hotter temperatures that we
see as a result
of human influence on climate
cause water
to evaporate from the soils more
quickly,
and so you have overall a dryer
land surface
and lower reservoirs and all of
that.
And that, there, there is a
climate change
influence.
So if you ask about the lack of
rainfall,
this event appears to be largely
natural,
is what the studies have shown.
But if you ask about the overall
dryness of
California, there does seem to
be some influence
of higher temperature, which is
a result of
climate change.
So, the studies have come to
different conclusions,
in part because they ask
different questions.
But I think that is the
complicated answer
to that question, as far as we
know now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Adam Sobel, Barry
Keim, thank you both very much
for being here.
ADAM SOBEL: Thank you.
BARRY KEIM: My pleasure.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
revealing
a secret NSA code leaves us all
vulnerable;
and we take you to the edge of a
Hawaiian
volcano to discover what makes
it erupt.
But, first: There are reports
that the United
Kingdom's process to begin
leaving the European
Union may not begin until later
next year,
delaying the U.K.'s so-called
Brexit.
The June vote to leave may have
surprised
many there, but it came as
welcome news to
the island nation's fishermen.
They have long complained about
European Union
rules, and now they're hoping
Brexit will
help them revitalize a fishing
industry they
say was damaged by E.U. policy.
From Southwest England, special
correspondent
Jennifer Glasse reports.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Fishermen have
brought their
catches into
Brixham Harbor since the Middle
Ages, when
it was the biggest fishing port
in Southwest
England.
The harbor and the fleet have
changed over
the centuries.
And skipper Mike Sharp hopes
there are more
changes to come.
That's why he voted for the U.K.
to leave
Europe.
MIKE SHARP, Fisherman: We have
all the Dutch,
and the French, and the Belgian
fishermen,
and mainly the Spanish as well
coming to land
to take our fish out of our
waters, which
we want to -- you know, I think
we still can
let them come in, but we can
decide how many
comes in.
JENNIFER GLASSE: European
Union-mandated quotas
stipulate what kind and how many
fish the
trawlers can bring in.
Sharp and other fishermen here
claim the quotas
favor boats from continental
Europe.
E.U. rules also limited the size
of fishing
fleets.
MIKE SHARP: When I started
fishing 30 years
ago, there was 60 beam trawlers,
and now there's
17.
So, I would like to see it built
back up.
JENNIFER GLASSE: A larger fleet
could mean
hundreds more jobs for deck
hands, engineers,
welders and, onshore,
processing, buying and
selling fish.
Brixham Fish Market is already
the largest
on England's South Coast,
handling about $35
million of annual trade.
This market itself was
modernized in part
with E.U. funds.
PAUL MORTIMER, Brixham: A lot of
the fish
we sell in England, we sell from
this market
here actually goes abroad.
I think just, because we're out
of the E.U.,
I don't think they're going to
stop buying
our fish.
They're still going to want our
fish.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Fish buyer
Steve Farrar says
his children voted to stay in
Europe because
they want to be able to study
and work there.
STEVE FARRAR, Fish Buyer: Oh, I
don't want
them that badly.
JENNIFER GLASSE: He voted to
leave because
he says it was a question of
democracy vs.
control from Europe.
STEVE FARRAR: I felt very much
that if I couldn't
vote somebody, a politician, in
or out, I
didn't want them making
decisions over my
life or my children's lives or
my grandchildren's
lives.
And that was the fundamental
issue, really.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Robert
Simonetti exports
fish and serves it at a local
restaurant,
including, what else, fish and
chips.
He doesn't think his out vote to
leave will
change much for his businesses.
ROBERT SIMONETTI, Fish Exporter:
For me, it
was all the immigration thing.
I think that's a big issue for
everybody.
You know, we want control about
who comes
into our country, really, the
people we don't
want, the criminals.
If you're coming here to work
and you're going
to be part of the community, we
don't care
what color you are, whether
you're white,
black or yellow.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Waitress Wendy
Lanyon says
any sacrifices made to leave
Europe will be
worth it.
WENDY LANYON, Waitress: I do
believe we're
going to -- it's going to be
hard for us as
a country, but nothing like what
they made
out it was going to be.
But we have survived before
without being
in the European Union.
And we will survive again.
I'm sure we will.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Despite the
anti-Europe sentiment
here, this harbor town has deep
historical
ties with the continent.
Dutch Prince William of Orange
landed here
on the 5th of November, 1688,
and he became
the king of England, ruling
alongside Queen
Mary.
Napoleon Bonaparte never
actually set foot
on land, but his ship was just
offshore before
he was sent into exile.
Over tea, local historian Edgar
Lawrence says
it's no surprise Britons voted
to leave.
EDGAR LAWRENCE, Historian: I'm
old enough
to have voted for the common
market, but what
we got wasn't anything like what
we had been
told it was going to be.
And it's just got worse and
worse.
JENNIFER GLASSE: And what do you
think Brexit
will do for Brixham and Devon
and Cornwall?
EDGAR LAWRENCE: Depends very
much on the politicians.
We know what we want it to do.
Will they agree to everything we
want, which
Europe doesn't seem to want us
to have?
JENNIFER GLASSE: The picturesque
beaches of
Devon and Cornwall counties
attract tourists
that bring in revenue, but not
enough to keep
the local economies afloat.
This area once produced tin and
copper and
china clay, but all you can see
of the mines
now are now abandoned shells.
After the mines closed, there
was a steady
decline in manufacturing and
other industries,
leaving this one of the poorest
areas in Europe.
Cornwall alone has received
hundreds of millions
of dollars in European aid,
support that's
now at risk.
The E.U. had pledged $650
million through
20 to Cornwall to continue to
support new
businesses, build infrastructure
and complete
high-speed Internet access to
the region.
The head of the local county
commission is
trying to ensure the money keeps
flowing,
whether from Europe or the U.K.
government.
JOHN POLLARD, Leader, Cornwall
Council: I
don't think the economic
argument played a
very big part in the decision.
It was more on fear and a
dislike of Brussels.
People like to blame somebody
for the ills
of the country, and Brussels was
getting the
blame.
So, it wasn't, in that sense,
economically
logical.
It was very much a reaction
vote.
JENNIFER GLASSE: One of
Cornwall's poorest
areas is Redruth.
This food bank gives out free
provisions to
the needy.
Vikki Rostron and her partner
are both unemployed
and have six children between
them.
She has no interest in politics
and didn't
vote.
VIKKI ROSTRON, Redruth,
Cornwall: I didn't
know enough about it to think
about it, to
be honest.
It's not -- it wasn't something
I wanted to
do, you know?
JENNIFER GLASSE: The food bank's
founder says
the Brexit vote won't hurt
Cornwall because
European money has not produced
the right
kind of jobs since the local
economy has evolved.
DONOVAN GARDNER, Food Bank
Founder: Those
jobs are not here anymore.
And that -- and they're still
not here.
Whether it's European money or
British government
money, those cyber-jobs are not
here in Cornwall.
And that's what we struggle
with.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Some in
Cornwall want the
government to bring back heavy
industry, not
a viable prospect.
And European funds have been
spent to create
21st century solutions to
Cornwall's limitations.
JOHN POLLARD: A lot of that
money is not visible,
so it doesn't build a school or
a sports center.
It builds a road, or it builds a
business
park, or it helps to develop a
digital industry.
And people, the man in the
street doesn't
-- they don't see that.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Back in
Brixham, the fishermen
head out to sea.
They say they have done their
part, persuading
the country to vote to get out
of Europe.
Now it's up to the politicians.
Negotiations are expected to
take two years
or many more.
The fishermen of Brixham hope
officials in
London and Brussels won't leave
them high
and dry.
Reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Jennifer
Glasse in Brixham, England.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The National
Security Agency's
primary mission is to spy on the
electronic
communications of countries and
people overseas.
Over the weekend, though,
sophisticated code
the NSA developed to penetrate
computer security
systems was posted online.
This serious breach comes amid
the ongoing
revelations of the hacking of
the Democratic
National Committee and other
organizations,
allegedly by groups linked to
Russian intelligence.
For more on this, we turn to The
Washington
Post national security
correspondent Ellen
Nakashima, and Paul Vixie.
He designed and built some of
the software
that is the backbone of the
Internet today.
He is now chairman and CEO of
Farsight Security,
a computer security firm.
Ellen Nakashima, what happened
this weekend?
What got released?
ELLEN NAKASHIMA, The Washington
Post: Over
the weekend, apparently on
Saturday, mysteriously,
a cache of NSA hacking tools was
released
online through file-sharing
sites such as
BitTorrent and Dropbox.
It really wasn't noticed until
about Monday,
when the computer security
community started
commenting on it and questions
arose as to
whether or not the NSA had been
hacked.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Paul
Vixie, if these
lock picks, these digital tools
to try break
into different systems out are
out in the
open now, these are the tools
that the American
government was using, what is
the consequence,
if it is in the public sphere?
PAUL VIXIE, Chairman and CEO,
Farsight Security:
Well, I think, every day,
everybody is trying
to hack everybody.
So, this is not huge news.
What's big news about it is that
these tools
were built by the U.S.
government.
Some of the lock picks, as you
call them,
are now obsolete.
They are relying on
vulnerabilities that have
since been closed, because the
files are about
3 years old.
But at least one of them is
active against
a very current piece of
equipment from Cisco.
And it is going to lead to a lot
of break-ins
while the patches are prepared
and shipped
and then applied.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ellen
Nakashima, what about
the idea that some of these are
as recent
as 2013?
Does the NSA know, if this was a
hack, if
this was something more recent?
ELLEN NAKASHIMA: The NSA
officially is not
commenting.
But former NSA operators,
personnel I have
interviewed were -- actually
recognized the
tooled that were released and
said they were,
indeed, legitimate.
And they don't believe that the
NSA was actually
hacked.
They think it is more likely
that perhaps
one of the operators at the
agency inadvertently
uploaded a tool set, an entire
tool set of
tools to a server, a staging
server in cyberspace,
and didn't recognize that, and
didn't pull
it back down.
And once it was out there, other
adversaries,
other spy agencies around the
world are also
sometimes sitting on these same
servers.
One of them might have noticed
it, got it,
took a copy of it, and got it,
without the
NSA realizing it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Paul Vixie,
how many people,
companies, governments does this
make vulnerable?
PAUL VIXIE: I haven't seen an
estimate of
the market size, but, really, we
have got
at least one of these
vulnerabilities that
is still current, and the patch
is being prepared
now.
Unfortunately, some of the ones
that are not
current are also going to work,
because many
enterprise networks are not
patched up to
date.
They can't afford the constant
churn of updating
their equipment, updating their
software.
And so even though some of the
vulnerabilities
that have been used by these
tools are no
longer current, they're still
going to -- those
picks are still going to fit
quite a few locks.
I don't really -- I would say,
in order of
magnitude, anywhere between
one-tenth and
one-half of the customer bases
for the largest
firewall vendors should really
be worried
right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That still
sounds like a
pretty large number.
PAUL VIXIE: Yes, that is a large
number.
The Internet was originally
academic.
And when it was built, every one
that could
reach you was trustworthy.
And, of course, that changed in
the mid-'90s,
when we commercialized and
privatized the
Internet.
And at that time, we started
developing this
firewall technology that was
meant to limit
sort of who could reach you or
how various
people could reach you.
And what that means is, the
inside of these
networks is very soft, full of
soft targets,
and tends to rely on firewall to
keep it safe.
So, any time you have a key that
will unlock
the firewall and let you do
whatever you want
to the other side, you suddenly
have a very
target-rich environment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ellen, the
people that you
have spoken to, are they
concerned that kind
of the design of these keys
would tip off
to whoever is using these tools
exactly who
the NSA targets, how they target
them, how
they create the breaches in
these firewalls?
ELLEN NAKASHIMA: Well,
absolutely.
So, that is one of the issues
with, you know,
a disclosure like this.
And I should say there are also
some former
employees who think it's more
likely that
some disgruntled insider stole
all the tools
and then put them out there,
perhaps for some
personal profit.
But, in any case, now that they
are out there,
they are available to other
hackers, other
spy agencies who could either
target companies
running these firewalls, or also
look and
watch to see what the NSA is
targeting and
exfiltrating as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ellen, in the
context the
sort of cyberwar that seems to
be escalating
between Russia and other
countries, the fact
that this happens now, what are
your sources
telling you about how these
tools could end
up in the wrong hands in a
political context?
ELLEN NAKASHIMA: Yes.
Look, it's -- I don't think we
have any hard
evidence as to who is behind the
release.
It's, at this point, I think,
largely circumstantial
that it -- some people think it
might be Russia.
The timing is certainly notable,
or suspect,
coming, as you noted, on the
heels of some
of the hacks of the DNC and the
DCCC and the
releases of hacked e-mails from
the DNC that
have been linked to Russia or,
more recently,
of hacked personal cell phone
numbers and
e-mail addresses of Democratic
lawmakers.
That also appears to be coming
from Russia.
So, some people think that maybe
this is another
signal from Russia to the Obama
administration,
to the White House that is no
doubt right
now discussing how they might
respond to all
of these Russian hacks and
provocations.
It's a signal to them to say,
hey, you know,
if you are thinking about
retaliating in some
way, calling us out, stepping up
sanctions,
or even responding in kind in
cyberspace,
think twice, because we can
cause you some
pain.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, finally,
briefly, Paul
Vixie, is there concern in the
computer security
committee -- community whether
the NSA can
keep its secrets safe?
PAUL VIXIE: There is.
The NSA needs a lot of fairly
controversial
data and tools in order to
accomplish its
mission.
And we depend on those type --
that kind of
data, those kind of tools not
being generally
available.
So, with this disclosure and
with the Edward
Snowden disclosures of a couple
of years ago,
there is some concern that maybe
there are
some types of data, some types
of tools that
shouldn't be created at all,
because there
just isn't a way to keep them
perfectly safe.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Paul Vixie, Ellen
Nakashima, thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, science
correspondent
Miles O'Brien joins a researcher
who ventures
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, science
correspondent
Miles O'Brien joins a researcher
who ventures
close to the glowing heart of an
active Hawaiian
volcano to learn what makes them
tick.
It's the latest in our weekly
Leading MD+IT /MD-IT /Edge
series.
MD+IT /MD-IT /
MIKE GARCIA, Geologist,
University of Hawaii:
OK.
MILES O'BRIEN: If you want to
learn what makes
a volcano erupt, you need to go
right to the
otherworldly source, the
crunchy, oozing,
red-hot source.
At least, that's what geologist
Mike Garcia
does.
MIKE GARCIA: Voila.
MILES O'BRIEN: Wow.
That's amazing.
Amazing, indeed.
Welcome to the most studied
volcano in the
world, Kilauea.
Garcia and I came here to this
surreal landscape
on Hawaii's Big Island by
helicopter.
On our way, we got a glimpse of
the red rock
cauldron of magma through the
sulfur-tainted
steam.
Kilauea is one of the longest
currently erupting
volcanoes on the planet.
The lava started flowing in
January of 1983.
MIKE GARCIA: So, the mantle is
producing an
enormous amount of hot material
that's coming
out of Kilauea.
This is probably one of the most
active periods
of the historical record of
Kilauea.
MILES O'BRIEN: The eruption
waxes and wanes,
at times spewing fountains of
lava, and, in
the 1990s, threatening and
destroying nearby
homes.
But, of late, it's been more
spectacle than
menace, a slow-motion window
into what lies
beneath the surface.
Through it all, there is one
constant here
besides flowing lava: Garcia.
He has been studying Kilauea for
30 years,
hoping to improve eruption
forecasting.
MIKE GARCIA: Well, with most
volcanoes, you
want to know when it's going to
erupt.
And so that's a primary concern.
But, in this case, where we have
an eruption
that's been going on for over 30
years, the
big question is, when is it
going to stop?
MILES O'BRIEN: He comes here
looking for data,
in this case a piece of freshly
cooked earth
just out of the oven.
He dunks it in water, freezing
the moment
and its chemical composition in
time, a geological
Instagram packed with data.
MIKE GARCIA: We know its
birthday.
We know when it was erupted.
And you might ask, well, why do
we -- why
do we care?
Because the lava composition
changes hourly,
daily, or -- and even monthly.
MILES O'BRIEN: And somewhere in
there might
be some sort of telltale sign of
whether it's
going to continue erupting or
not, right?
MIKE GARCIA: Absolutely.
In science, one of the key
things we do now
are time series studies, where
we collect
samples repeatedly during the
course of an
eruption or in the ocean,
because it's evolving
all the time.
MILES O'BRIEN: Back in his lab
at the University
of Hawaii in Honolulu, graduate
student Kendra
Lynn does her part to understand
Kilauea,
shaving rocks into 30-micron
slices, and then
analyzing them using an electron
microprobe.
She is interested in this green
mineral called
olivine.
It is the most common mineral
that forms at
Kilauea.
What can we learn from it?
KENDRA LYNN, Graduate Student,
University
of Hawaii: Because it's the
first thing to
crystallize in these magmas, it
tells us a
lot about the mantle source,
where the magmas
came from.
And it can also tell us a lot
about the magma's
history.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is just one
of many tests
the team routinely conducts to
analyze the
elements and isotopes in the
newborn rocks.
MIKE GARCIA: Each of the
processes within
the volcano leaves a
fingerprint.
So, over the years, we have been
able to develop
an understanding of what those
fingerprints
are and what they tell us about
what's going
on in the volcano.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, where are we
right now?
What is this?
MIKE GARCIA: We're looking at
the rock collection
we have from the Pu'u 'O'o
eruption, as well
as some of the other Hawaiian
eruptions.
MILES O'BRIEN: And over the
years he has amassed
an impressive collection of
rocks, not just
from Kilauea, but from volcanoes
all over
the Hawaiian islands.
MIKE GARCIA: So, this is July 23
of 1997.
And this one looks a little
grayer.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, it's not
quite as shiny,
for whatever reason.
Why would that be?
MIKE GARCIA: But you can see the
imprint.
Well, it was a little cooler at
the time it
was quenched.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ah, I see.
If only these rocks could talk.
Fortunately, Garcia is pretty
adept at reading
them.
One of the things he focuses on
is the temperature
of the lava.
MIKE GARCIA: So, what we have
seen is a long-term
decrease.
Initially, the lava temperature
was low.
It increased.
The eruption roared upward.
And now it's been slowly waning
as -- and
we see the temperature of the
lava is indicating
a decrease.
So, we think this eruption might
end in the
near future.
But it's ended several times in
the past.
It was quiet in 1997 for a
month, and then
it restarted.
MILES O'BRIEN: Back at the lava
flow, Garcia
told me his work is not as
dangerous as it
seems, a calculated risk for a
good scientific
cause.
All right, so what is the
strategy for walking?
How do you know what to step on?
MIKE GARCIA: We need to avoid
areas that look
shelly, indicating that the lava
has drained
out from underneath.
So we try to look for places
where it looks
solid, so we can avoid
collapsing in on the
lava flow.
MILES O'BRIEN: I'm just going to
follow you.
How's that?
MIKE GARCIA: Very good.
MILES O'BRIEN: But while we were
here, some
newly minted, still hot Hawaiian
earth melted
the soles right off of his
shoes.
Wow, just like that.
Is the other one already gone?
MIKE GARCIA: No, no.
Oh, you're absolutely right.
MILES O'BRIEN: Holy moly.
Wow.
All in a day's work for an
intrepid geologist
determined to go with and to the
flow.
MIKE GARCIA: Success.
MILES O'BRIEN: Miles O'Brien,
the "PBS NewsHour,"
at the Hawaii Volcanoes National
Park.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tomorrow night
at 5:00 p.m.
Eastern, tune in to our home
page, where you
can watch a livestream of a
forum on race
and the race to the White House.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Charlayne
Hunter-Gault and Henry Louis
Gates Jr. will
host a panel of guests.
That's tomorrow.
And there's more now on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that is the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
And I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Join us online
and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.